Elmer Earl "Butch" Hartman IV (born January 10, 1965) is an American animator, writer, producer, director, and voice actor. He is most known for creating the Nickelodeon series The Fairly OddParents, Danny Phantom, T.U.F.F. Puppy, and Bunsen Is a Beast. Hartman also owns a production company, Billionfold Inc., which he uses primarily to produce his shows. Hartman was an executive producer on The Fairly OddParents for the entirety of its 16-year run. On February 8, 2018, Hartman announced in a YouTube video that he had left Nickelodeon on February 2 after having worked at the studio since December 1997; he confirmed that this resulted in the end of production on Bunsen Is a Beast after one season. His latest animated program, The Garden, premiered on Pure Flix in 2023. In 2021, he returned to Nickelodeon to produce a live- action Fairly OddParents reboot show, The Fairly OddParents: Fairly Odder, which premiered on Paramount+ on March 31, 2022. ==Early life== Hartman was born in Highland Park, Michigan. He received the nickname Butch as a young boy and continued to use it as an adult. Hartman spent his childhood in Roseville, Michigan, and his teenage years in New Baltimore, Michigan. He graduated from Anchor Bay High School in New Baltimore in 1983, and subsequently attended the California Institute of the Arts in Valencia, California. He graduated in 1987 with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree. As a young student he appeared on The Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour winning close to $3,000. ==Career== ===Early career=== While still attending CalArts, Hartman interned as an in-between animator on the Don Bluth film An American Tail. Before graduating, he was a contestant on the Match Game-Hollywood Squares Hour for three episodes and shortly after graduating, he was hired as a character designer and storyboard artist for an unidentified My Little Pony animated series. As he had no previous experience with storyboards, he was soon fired. Afterwards, he found work with Ruby-Spears, where he worked on It's Punky Brewster and Dink, the Little Dinosaur. He was also a member of the video reference crew for the Disney film Pocahontas. In the early 1990s he was hired as an artist in the model department at Hanna-Barbera, and was eventually contacted by studio president Fred Seibert to make the shorts Pfish and Chip and Gramps for the What a Cartoon! Show. Eventually, he became a writer, director and storyboard artist for several of the early Cartoon Network shows, including Dexter's Laboratory, Johnny Bravo, Cow and Chicken, and I Am Weasel. After his contract with Hanna-Barbera expired, he went to work with Seibert at his new studio, Frederator, on the Oh Yeah! Cartoons show for Nickelodeon. During his time working at Hanna-Barbera, he became friends with future Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane. The two would later go on to make the short Zoomates together for Oh Yeah! Cartoons. The character Dr. Elmer Hartman in Family Guy was named after Hartman. He also voiced various characters in the show's first few seasons. ===Working at Nickelodeon=== His biggest success came in December 1997, when he created The Fairly OddParents. The series originally started out as a series of shorts on the anthology show, Oh Yeah! Cartoons. Eventually, Nickelodeon decided to pick the shorts up as a full series. Premiering in 2001, the adapted series ended up becoming a huge hit, second only in the ratings to SpongeBob SquarePants (and it briefly even passed SpongeBobs ratings). Following the third The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius crossover The Jimmy-Timmy Power Hour 3: The Jerkinators, the series ceased production in 2006, but it was announced on Hartman's forum on February 2, 2007, that 20 more episodes would be produced; the 6th season of Fairly OddParents aired on February 18, 2008, starting with the 1-hour special Fairly OddBaby. From May 1, 2009, to May 3, 2009, the 3-part special Wishology aired; although that too was originally intended as a series finale, the series was renewed for another season. A tenth season was eventually ordered in 2015. The Fairly OddParents is Nickelodeon's second longest-running animated show behind SpongeBob. Due to the success of The Fairly OddParents, Hartman was asked to create another show for Nickelodeon; Hartman says the President of Nickelodeon asked him if he had an idea, and before he could say the title he was given the greenlight. The show would later become Danny Phantom. To produce the show, in 2003, Hartman founded his own production company Billionfold Inc., which he also used, and still uses today, to produce his other projects. Danny Phantom received critical acclaim and is considered Hartman's best show, with Hartman himself acknowledging it as perhaps the best of his programs. Danny Phantom ended production in early 2007. Around 2008–2009, Hartman began production his third show for Nickelodeon, T.U.F.F. Puppy, which premiered in 2010 alongside the Jimmy Neutron spin-off Planet Sheen. The series received mixed to positive reviews and ran for 3 seasons before being cancelled. His final show, Bunsen Is a Beast, aired on Nickelodeon and Nicktoons from January 16, 2017, to February 10, 2018. On February 8, 2018, Hartman announced on his Twitter and YouTube accounts that he had left Nickelodeon as of February 2 after a 20-year run. ===Other works=== In 2015, Hartman launched a "kid-safe [online] network of live shows and cartoons" called the Noog Network. In October 2017, Hartman started a podcast called Speech Bubble, on which he talks about cartoons, movies, pop culture, and various other topics. Several voice actors have appeared on the podcast, including Rob Paulsen, Tara Strong, Jerry Trainor, Grey Griffin, and Vic Mignogna. After initially posting excerpts on his primary YouTube channel, the podcast videos were later moved to its own dedicated YouTube channel, now including full episodes. In June 2018, Hartman started a Kickstarter campaign for OAXIS Entertainment, a "family-friendly" streaming service. After the fundraising goal had been reached, it was then revealed the OAXIS was planned to be a Christian network, which was not disclosed during the fundraiser. However, Hartman later claimed that, while faith would continue to be a part of his personal life, OAXIS would not be a faith-based service. On June 22, 2019, Hartman released the animated web series, HobbyKids Adventures. This series, produced by PocketWatch, Inc., was created for YouTube channel HobbyKidsTV. On 13 July, Hartman released a book, Mad Hustle, which details the ins and outs on pitching and selling a show in Hollywood. In 2019, Hartman created, wrote, and produced a Christian animated web series for preschoolers called The Garden, along with his wife, Julieann. The Hartmans have already planned at least two seasons of the series and plan to launch a subscription-based app for The Garden in late 2022. Hartman's further plans for the property include creating a VBS curriculum for churches and illustrating a children's bible published by Thomas Nelson, entitled The Garden Children's Bible, which stars the characters from The Garden and is scheduled to release in 2023. The series premiered on Pure Flix on January 1, 2023, with six new episodes and more in the works. In February 2021, Hartman was accused of plagiarism when he published his commissioned artwork of Attack on Titan character Mikasa Ackerman, in which similarities were noted to a 2018 artwork of a Japanese artist. The artist confirmed Hartman did not receive permission. ===Return to Nickelodeon=== In February 2021, Hartman was announced to be returning as a producer of The Fairly OddParents: Fairly Odder, a live-action/animated reboot of his original show. The show premiered on March 31, 2022. ==Personal life== Hartman currently lives in Bell Canyon, California, with his wife, Julieann, and daughters, Carly and Sophia Hartman. He also has three younger brothers. Hartman is also an openly devout born-again Christian and young-Earth creationist, converting in 2000 after hearing a sermon by Frederick K. C. Price. In 2005, Hartman, along with his wife, founded Hartman House, a non- profit organization that supports those in developing nations, as well as some of the most poverty stricken areas in the United States. Hartman House has built two homes for families in Guatemala, fed nearly 7,200 families with Thanksgiving meals in the U.S., and is in the midst of funding a school in Uganda. At Hartman House events, Hartman usually draws and autographs items related to his work for children. ==Filmography== ===Film=== Year Title Role Notes 1986 An American Tail In between artist 1992 California Hot Wax Eddie 1994 Scooby-Doo! in Arabian Nights Character designer 1995 Pocahontas Video reference cast 1997 Annabelle's Wish Storyboard artist Direct-to-video 1998 Adventures in Odyssey: Baby Daze Storyboard artist Adventures in Odyssey: A Stranger Among Us Storyboard artist 2006 Doogal Voice Director 2011 A Fairly Odd Movie: Grow Up, Timmy Turner! Waiter Writer 2012 A Fairly Odd Christmas Christmas Caroler Story and screenplay 2014 A Fairly Odd Summer Crazy Guy Writer ===Television=== Year Title Role Notes 1984 Match Game Hollywood Squares Hour Contestant 1985 Body Language Contestant 1985–1986 It's Punky Brewster Models 1987 Growing Pains Robert Jordan Episode 3.5: "Michaelgate" 1988 Just the Ten of Us Rod Grossman Episode 1.4: "Close Encounters" Police Academy Models 1988–1989 Days of Our Lives Henry Jake 1989 Dink, the Little Dinosaur Storyboard artist 1990 Piggsburg Pigs! Key model designer 1991–1993 Tom & Jerry Kids Character designer 1993 Droopy, Master Detective Designer 1995 What a Cartoon! Creator: "Pfish & Chip", & "Gramps"; writer/director "Hillbilly Blue" 1996–1999 Jumanji Storyboard artist: 3 episodes 1996–1997 Dexter's Laboratory Storyboard artist/background designer/layout artist 1996–1998 The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper Storyboard artist 1996 Timon & Pumbaa Storyboard artist: "Beast of Eden", 1 episode, credited as Elmer Hartman 1997–1999 Johnny Bravo Storyboard artist/writer: story/director 1997 Cow & Chicken Models/storyboard artist 1997 I Am Weasel Models/storyboard artist 1998–2002 Oh Yeah! Cartoons Creator: "The Fairly OddParents" and "Dan Danger"; director/producer: "Terry and Chris"; director/storyboard artist: "Zoomates" 1999–2002 Family Guy Jonathan Weed (pilot pitch only) / Additional voices 8 episodes 1999–2002 The New Woody Woodpecker Show Storyboard artist: "Temper, Temper", 1 episode 2001–2017 The Fairly OddParents Dr. Rip Studwell / Additional voices Creator/story/writer/director/storyboard artist/voice actor/theme music composer/executive producer 2002 The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron, Boy Genius Writer: "See Jimmy Run" 2004 Danny Phantom Football Announcer 1 (episode: "What You Want") Creator/story/writer/storyboard artist/voice actor/director/theme music composer/executive producer 2010–2015 T.U.F.F. Puppy Agent Weaselman / Agent Rodentski / Escape Goat / TV Voice Creator/story/music composer/voice actor/executive producer/writer/storyboard artist/director 2010–2013 Big Time Rush Himself Episode: "Big Time Cartoon" Guest animator on "Big Time Christmas" 2017–2018 Bunsen Is a Beast Fido / Beast Ball / Pete / Memory Pete / Kitten Creator/writer/storyboard artist/executive producer/theme music composer 2022 The Fairly OddParents: Fairly Odder Executive producer ===Internet=== Year Title Role Notes 2017 The Fairly Odd Phantom Internet short that reunites characters from all Butch Hartman shows created for Nickelodeon 2019–2020 HobbyKids Adventures SlobbySnake (episode: "The Drawing Board") Creator/executive producer/director/writer/designs/voice actor 2019 The Garden Creator/story/writer/storyboard artist/director/executive producer ==Written works== Year Title Publisher ISBN Notes Ref 2017 Butch Hartman: Sketchbook 1: Stuff I've drawn or am drawn to. CreateSpace Author and illustrator 3 O'Clock Club Vol. 1: School's Out... of Control! ROAR Comics Co-author with Jordan B. Gorfinkel 2018 Vision: Possible! CreateSpace Co-author with Julieann Hartman 2020 Hannah and the Beanstalk: A True Story of Faith Harrison House Publishers Illustrator Mad Hustle: How to pitch & sell shows in Hollywood CreateSpace Author 2023 The Garden Children's Bible Thomas Nelson Illustrator ==References== ==External links== * Category:1965 births Category:Living people Category:21st-century American male writers Category:21st-century American screenwriters Category:American animated film directors Category:American animated film producers Category:American animators Category:American cartoonists Category:American Christians Category:American Christian writers Category:American illustrators Category:American male screenwriters Category:American male television writers Category:American male voice actors Category:American podcasters Category:American storyboard artists Category:American television directors Category:American television producers Category:American television writers Category:American YouTubers Category:Animators from Michigan Category:California Institute of the Arts alumni Category:Cartoon Network Studios people Category:Contestants on American game shows Category:Hanna-Barbera people Category:Nickelodeon Animation Studio people Category:People from Bell Canyon, California Category:People from Highland Park, Michigan Category:People from New Baltimore, Michigan Category:People from Roseville, Michigan Category:Screenwriters from California Category:Screenwriters from Michigan Category:Showrunners Category:Television producers from California Category:Television producers from Michigan Category:YouTube animators Category:YouTube channels launched in 2015