The Burlington County Institute of Technology (BCIT) is a county-wide public school district that serves the vocational and technical education needs of students at the high school and post-secondary level in Burlington County, New Jersey, United States. BCIT's more than 2,000 students come from 38 sending school districts throughout the county. BCIT has campuses in Medford and Westampton townships. Admission to BCIT is based on a competitive admissions test. The district develops apprenticeship and job training programs with local businesses and educational institutions. As of the 2020–21 school year, the district, comprising two schools, had an enrollment of 2,135 students and 155.5 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 13.7:1.District information for Burlington County Institute Of Technology School District, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed February 15, 2022. ==Campuses== The district's two campuses (with 2020–21 enrollment data from the National Center for Education StatisticsSchool Data for the Burlington County Institute of Technology, National Center for Education Statistics. Accessed February 15, 2022.) are:School Performance Reports for the Burlington County Institute of Technology School District, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed February 27, 2022.New Jersey School Directory for the Burlington County Institute of Technology, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 29, 2016. *Burlington County Institute of Technology Medford CampusBurlington County Institute of Technology Medford Campus, Burlington County Institute of Technology. Accessed April 13, 2021. (896 students) *Burlington County Institute of Technology Westampton CampusBurlington County Institute of Technology Westampton Campus, Burlington County Institute of Technology. Accessed April 13, 2021. (1,241 students) ==Programs== BCIT offers educational programs in a broad range of fields:Burlington County Institute of Technology 2015 Report Card Narrative, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed November 10, 2016. *High tech: Electronics, Computer Science Applications, Computer Assisted Drafting and Office Technologies, Robotics, Pre-engineering, A+ and NET+. *Traditional majors: Automotive Technology, Printing/Graphics Communication, Welding, Drafting, Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning, Fleet Maintenance Mechanics and Auto Body Repair are certified by the respective industries. Cosmetology and Health Occupations must pass licensing exams upon completion of their educational programs. Building Trade, Electrical Trade and Office Technology students in the high school program enroll in apprenticeships during their senior year. *Other: Geospatial Technologies, Veterinarian Assistant, Ornamental Horticulture, Marketing, Culinary Arts, Advertising, Art and Design, Early Childhood Education and Child Care, Fashion Design and Fabrication, Law and Public Safety and Sports Medicine. ==Administration== Core members of the district's administration are:Board of Education, Burlington County Board of Education. Accessed May 9, 2023.New Jersey School Directory for Burlington County, New Jersey Department of Education. Accessed December 29, 2016. *Dr. Christopher Nagy, superintendent of schoolsSuperintendent of Schools, Burlington County Institute of Technology. Accessed May 9, 2023. *Andrew C. Willmott, business administrator and board secretaryBusiness Office, Burlington County Institute of Technology. Accessed May 9, 2023. ==Board of education == The district's board of education comprises the county superintendent of schools and six public members who set policy and oversee the fiscal and educational operation of the district through its administration. As a Type I school district, the board's trustees are appointed by the Burlington County Board of County Commissioners to serve four-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with either one or two members up for reappointment each year. The board appoints a superintendent to oversee the day-to-day operation of the district.New Jersey Boards of Education by District Election Types - 2018 School Election, New Jersey Department of Education, updated February 16, 2018. Accessed January 26, 2020.Comprehensive Annual Financial Report of the Burlington County Institute of Technology, New Jersey Department of Education, for year ending June 30, 2022. Accessed May 9, 2023. "The Burlington County Institute of Technology is a Type I District located in the County of Burlington, State of New Jersey. As a Type I district, the School District functions independently through a Board of Education. The Board comprises appointed officials by the County Commissioners and is responsible for the fiscal control of the District. A Superintendent is appointed by the Board and is responsible for the administrative control of the District. The Board has six members appointed to four year terms, who are staggered so that one member’s term expires each year. In addition, the County Superintendent services as an ex-officio member." ==References== ==External links== * * * *Data for the Burlington County Institute of Technology, National Center for Education Statistics Category:School districts in Burlington County, New Jersey Category:Vocational school districts in New Jersey Category:Westampton Township, New Jersey