Benedict Graham John Broster (born 7 May 1982) is a former professional rugby union footballer. Born in Southwark, London, he began his professional career with Saracens, and also played for the Llanelli Scarlets, Northampton Saints, London Wasps, Biarritz, and Bayonne. He is a tighthead prop and is known for his scrummaging technique and mobility. Broster was educated at Hurstpierpoint College, and started his career coming though the ranks at Haywards Heath RFC. He made his English Premiership debut for Saracens in 2002 against Northampton SaintsMallinder keen on forwards battle after key signings – Northampton Chronicle and Echo before making his debut start against London Wasps in 2003. Broster was a member of the Wales squad that toured the United States and Canada in the summer of 2005, and was capped in games against both teams. He came off the bench to win his first cap against USA,WALES CLIP EAGLES WINGS and scored a try on his first start against Canada.Canada 3–60 Wales After seven years with the London club, graduating from their academy, Broster joined the Llanelli Scarlets for one season in May 2007. He joined Northampton Saints for the start of the 2008–09 season making one appearance in the Anglo- Welsh Cup. In the summer of 2009, London Wasps signed Broster on an initial one-year deal. He started nearly every game, and in April 2010, he signed a new contract to keep him at the club for a further two years. After cementing himself as a mainstay of the Wasps team for three seasons, Broster signed a deal taking him across the Channel to Top 14 side Biarritz Olympique until 2014. He later played for Bayonne before an injury forced him to retire in 2018. ==References== ==External links== *Profile at wasps.co.uk *Profile at scarlets.co.uk *Profile at saracens.com Category:1982 births Category:Living people Category:Rugby union props Category:English rugby union players Category:English people of Welsh descent Category:Wales international rugby union players Category:Welsh rugby union players Category:Saracens F.C. players Category:Northampton Saints players Category:Scarlets players Category:London Irish players Category:People educated at Hurstpierpoint College Category:Rugby union players from the London Borough of Southwark Category:People from Southwark Category:English expatriate rugby union players Category:Welsh expatriate rugby union players Category:English expatriate sportspeople in France Category:Welsh expatriate sportspeople in France Category:Expatriate rugby union players in France Category:Aviron Bayonnais players Category:Biarritz Olympique players