Robert Leo Farrelly Jr. (born June 17, 1958) is an American film director, screenwriter and producer. He is one of the Farrelly brothers, alongside his brother Peter, and together are known directing and producing quirky, slightly offensive comedy films such as Dumb and Dumber, Shallow Hal, Me, Myself and Irene, There's Something About Mary, and the 2007 remake of The Heartbreak Kid. == Life and career == Farrelly was raised in Cumberland, Rhode Island, to Mariann, a nurse practitioner, and Dr. Robert Leo Farrelly.Bobby Farrelly Biography (1958?-) His grandparents were Irish immigrants, and he also has Polish ancestry. He is a graduate of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, where he entered the school on a hockey scholarship. Bobby and his brother Peter Farrelly are known as the Farrelly brothers. They have written, directed and produced several comedy films including Dumb and Dumber, There's Something About Mary, Kingpin, Shallow Hal, Me, Myself & Irene and Stuck on You, as well as Fever Pitch, and The Lost Son of Havana. They conceived the Seinfeld episode "The Virgin" (4.10) In 2014, Bobby and Peter directed Dumb and Dumber To, the sequel to their 1994 blockbuster hit Dumb and Dumber. In 2016, Bobby directed two episodes of Season 10 of the Canadian cult mockumentary TV series Trailer Park Boys. In 2020, Bobby and Peter directed the Quibi comedy series The Now. == Personal life == Farrelly has been married to his wife Nancy since 1990; they have two sons and a daughter. One of Farrelly's sons, is transgender comedian A.B. Farrelly. == References == == External links == * * Category:1958 births Category:American film producers Category:American male screenwriters Category:American television directors Category:American television producers Category:American people of Irish descent Category:Comedy film directors Category:Living people Category:Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute alumni Category:RPI Engineers men's ice hockey players Category:People from Providence County, Rhode Island Category:People from Cumberland, Rhode Island Category:Film directors from Rhode Island Category:Screenwriters from Rhode Island it:Bobby Farrelly