The Baku–Rostov highway bombing was an incident which occurred near the village of Shaami-Yurt in Chechnya, on October 29, 1999. Two low-flying Russian aircraft carried out repeated rocket attacks on a large convoy of refugees trying to enter the Russian republic of Ingushetia through a supposed "safe exit" route. The attacks killed or injured scores of people. == Incident == The incident took place after it was officially announced that the border between Chechnya and Ingushetia would re-open following a week's closure. However, the convoy of more than 1,000 vehicles heading to safety was not permitted to cross the border and ordered to turn back by an unidentified senior Russian military officer (the area was under responsibility of Gen. Vladimir Shamanov), and subsequently attacked on their way back to the besieged Chechen capital Grozny. According to the Amnesty International report, "at the time of the Russian attacks there were no legitimate military targets in the area. Eyewitness accounts of this incident would seem to indicate that the Russian forces had deliberately targeted civilians and civilian objects, despite some of them being marked with the Red Cross emblem, in violation of international humanitarian law."Russian Federation (Chechnya): For the motherland: Reported grave breaches of international humanitarian law. Attack on a civilian convoy near Shami-Yurt (29 October) , Amnesty International, 1 December 1999 The victims included local International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement workers, two killed Chechen journalists (including Ramzan Mezhidov), and numerous women and children, some of them reportedly burned alive while trapped in their vehicles. Russian authorities have at first officially denied responsibility,Russia denies deadly attack on refugee convoy, The Independent, Nov 1, 1999 and the later military investigations were not meaningful. == Similar incidents == A similar aerial attack on a large column of refugees fleeing Grozny fighting took place in August 1996.Truce That Never Was: Chechens Tricked, The New York Times, August 15, 1996 A number of other attacks on "humanitarian corridor" refugee convoys and foot columns were also reported later in 1999-2000, including a December 3 incident in which about 40 people were shot to death at a Russian police checkpoint. In 2008 a suspected mass grave of some 300 persons was uncovered near Grozny, likely containing remains of victims of an artillery attack on a "green corridor" in October 1999.Mass Grave Uncovered in Chechnya: The Other Russia == ECHR judgement == On February 24, 2005, the European Court of Human Rights found Russia guilty of violation of the right to life and other human rights violations in the case of the attack on the "safe passage" convoy after a joint complaint was submitted to the Court by three various survivors in 2003,Chechnya: The Fight for Rights, Time, January 26, 2003 summing up the established facts in its verdict:Isayeva, Yusopova and Bazayeva v. Russia, Application No. 57947-49/00, Judgement of 24 February 2005 == References == == External links == *"Russia hits refugee convoy", BBC News, October 29, 1999. Category:1999 in Russia Category:Mass murder in Russia Category:Second Chechen War Category:Aerial bombing operations and battles Category:Mass murder in 1999 Category:October 1999 events in Russia Category:October 1999 crimes Category:War crimes of the Second Chechen War