Barry Ferguson (born 7 September 1979) is an Irish former professional football player and currently a development officer with the Football Association of Ireland. ==Career== Ferguson began his football career with Home Farm before moving to Coventry City. While there he played at the FIFA World Youth Championship finals in Nigeria in 1999. Although he never made a competitive first team appearance for City, Ferguson went on to have brief spells in the lower divisions with Colchester United, Hartlepool United and Northampton Town. Ferguson returned to Ireland to link up with Longford Town in the summer of 2002. He captained FAI Cup and League Cup winning teams during his three years at the midlands club. Ferguson scored in a 2004–05 UEFA Cup tie against FC Vaduz. As Longford's penalty taker he missed the chance for an equaliser in the last minute of the 2003 FAI League Cup Final. He made his Rovers debut on the opening day of the 2007 League of Ireland season at UCD. He signed for the club from city rivals Bohemians in January 2007, having spent just one season with the Dalymount outfit. Ferguson was forced to retire in February 2009 due to a serious hip injury. ==Personal life== He is the father of Brighton & Hove Albion striker Evan Ferguson. Barry met Evan's mother Sarah whilst playing for Coventry. ==Honours== Longford Town *FAI Cup: 2003, 2004 *League of Ireland Cup: 2004 == References== Category:1979 births Category:Living people Category:Association footballers from Dublin (city) Category:Republic of Ireland association footballers Category:Home Farm F.C. players Category:Colchester United F.C. players Category:Hartlepool United F.C. players Category:Northampton Town F.C. players Category:Longford Town F.C. players Category:Bohemian F.C. players Category:Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Category:Sporting Fingal F.C. players Category:Coventry City F.C. players Category:League of Ireland players Category:Republic of Ireland men's under-21 international footballers Category:Republic of Ireland men's youth international footballers Category:Men's association football defenders