Beep, Beep is a 1952 Warner Bros. Merrie Melodies series directed by Chuck Jones. The short was released on May 24, 1952, and stars Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner. The cartoon is named after the sound the Road Runner makes, which is often misheard as "Meep, meep". == Plot == The Road Runner is being chased by Wile E. Coyote carrying a knife and fork, but the Road Runner is too fast for him. Wile E. tries using a spring-loaded glove, which fails. He crosses a tightwire to drop an anvil on the Road Runner, but the anvil is too heavy, and Wile E. is stretched all the way to the ground, alerting the Road Runner, who taunts him and runs off. Wile E. drops the anvil and is slung up into the air. As he falls, he tries using a parachute, but only random objects come out of it. He then takes some aspirin and waves goodbye to the camera before hitting the ground. Wile E. then tries to bait the Road Runner with water attached by string to a TNT device. The Road Runner ignores the water and runs up to his rival, holding a sign saying "Road Runners can't read and don't drink". Infuriated, Wile E. chases Road Runner into a mine, putting on a helmet for light. Eventually, Wile E. lights a match to see in the dark, but happens to be in a tunnel laden with explosives, which detonates. Wile E. loads himself on a springboard in order to sling himself towards the passing Road Runner. When he cuts the rope holding him back, he is slammed into the ground. Wile E. then tries using a rocket to chase the Road Runner. He lights the fuse, but the rocket fires directly up into the sky and explodes into fireworks showing a restaurant advertisement. He then attempts to use ACME's rocket-powered roller skates to chase the Road Runner. Wile E. is quicker than the Road Runner and gains on him. When the road takes a turn, however, the coyote shoots off a cliff and crashes into the ground. Exhausted, he tries to drink the water he previously used as a trap, and the TNT explodes. Wile E. places a small railroad track, two bushes, himself, and a railroad stop sign in the middle of the road. This fails to stop the Road Runner, who speeds past the Coyote and leaves him laying on the track to be flattened by a train. The Road Runner relaxes on the balcony of the caboose as it departs. == In Other Media == * This short is briefly featured in the 1996 film, Space Jam, during a scene where Wile E. is doing the tightwire segment, Porky Pig shows up and interrupts the cartoon to get the Tunes to an emergency meeting concerning the Tunes being taken to Moron Mountain. The new footage of the short was produced by Warner Bros. Feature Animation. == See also == * Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies filmography (1950–1959) * Beep, beep (sound) == References == == External links == * * Category:Merrie Melodies short films Category:Warner Bros. Cartoons animated short films Category:1952 animated films Category:Short films directed by Chuck Jones Category:Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner films Category:American comedy short films Category:1952 short films Category:American animated short films Category:Animated films about birds Category:1950s Warner Bros. animated short films Category:Animated films without speech Category:Films with screenplays by Michael Maltese Category:Films scored by Carl Stalling Category:Films about Canis Category:Animated films about mammals Category:Films produced by Edward Selzer