The B & O Railroad Potomac River Crossing is a historic site where a set of railroad bridges, originally built by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, span the Potomac River between Sandy Hook, Maryland and Harpers Ferry, West Virginia. The site was added to the National Register of Historic Places on February 14, 1978 for its significance in commerce, engineering, industry, invention, and transportation. With ==History== The original Harper's Ferry operated from 1733 until it was replaced by a timber covered road bridge in about 1824 at the confluence of the Potomac and Shenandoah Rivers.Note: Harwood (p. 44) states an opening date of 1829. Built in 1836–1837, the B&O;'s first crossing over the Potomac was an covered wood truss. It was the only rail crossing of the Potomac River until after the American Civil War. The single-track bridge, composed of six river spans plus a span over the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, was designed by Benjamin Henry Latrobe, II. In 1837 the Winchester and Potomac Railroad reached Harpers Ferry from the south, and Latrobe joined it to the B&O; line using a "Y" span. John Brown used the B&O; bridge at the beginning of his failed attempt to start a slave insurrection in Virginia and further south. The bridge was destroyed during the Civil War and replaced temporarily with a pontoon bridge. The two crossings today, which are on different alignments, are from the late 19th century and early 20th century. A steel Pratt truss and plate girder bridge was built in 1894 to carry the B&O; Valley Line (now the CSX Shenandoah Subdivision) toward Winchester, Virginia, along the Shenandoah River. This was complemented in 1930–1931 with a deck plate girder bridge that carried the B&O; Main Line (now the CSX Cumberland Subdivision) to Martinsburg, West Virginia. A rail tunnel, known as the Harpers Ferry Tunnel, was built at the same time as the 1894 bridge to carry the Valley Line through the Maryland Heights, eliminating a sharp curve. In the 1930s the western portal was widened during the construction of the second bridge to allow the broadest possible curve across the river. === Accident === On December 21, 2019, a CSX freight train derailed on the bridge, sending several cars into the river. There were no injuries and the bridge was later reopened. ==Gallery== File:CSX locomotives, Harpers Ferry Tunnel.jpg|West Portal of the Harpers Ferry Tunnel File:Potomac River Crossing after Hurricane Ida, Harpers Ferry, WV.jpg|View from the Split Rock overlook in 2021 ==See also== *Harpers Ferry National Historical Park *Harpers Ferry Historic District *John Brown's Raid on Harpers Ferry *List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in Maryland *List of bridges documented by the Historic American Engineering Record in West Virginia *List of bridges on the National Register of Historic Places in Maryland *List of bridges on the National Register of Historic Places in West Virginia ==References== ==External links== * * * *, including photo in 1978, at Maryland Historical Trust Category:American Civil War sites in West Virginia Category:Baltimore and Ohio Railroad bridges Category:Bridges completed in 1851 Category:Railroad bridges on the National Register of Historic Places in Maryland Category:Railroad bridges on the National Register of Historic Places in West Virginia Category:Buildings and structures in Jefferson County, West Virginia Category:Buildings and structures in Washington County, Maryland Category:Bridges over the Potomac River Category:Harpers Ferry, West Virginia Category:Historic American Engineering Record in Maryland Category:Historic American Engineering Record in West Virginia Category:Jefferson County, West Virginia in the American Civil War Category:National Register of Historic Places in Jefferson County, West Virginia Category:Railroad bridges in Maryland Category:Railroad bridges in West Virginia Category:Transportation in Jefferson County, West Virginia Category:Transportation in Washington County, Maryland Category:Tourist attractions in Jefferson County, West Virginia Category:1851 establishments in Maryland Category:Steel bridges in the United States Category:Plate girder bridges in the United States Category:Pratt truss bridges in the United States Category:1851 establishments in Virginia Category:Interstate railroad bridges in the United States Category:Buildings and structures in Harpers Ferry, West Virginia