thumb|right|B. Ekbal Dr. Ekbal Bappukunju is a public health activist, a neurosurgeon, and an academic in Kerala, India and is serving as a member of the Kerala State Planning Board since 2016. He was the Vice-chancellor of the University of Kerala during the period 2000–2004.He completed his pre-degree from St. Berchmans College Changanacherry.Former vice chancellors of the University of Kerala Accessed: 2008-10-20. (Archived by WebCite at ) He was a member of the Kerala State Planning Board from 1996 to 2000, during which he played a vital role in People's Plan Campaign, a decentralization move by the Government of Kerala. He was contested in the 2011 Kerala Legislative Assembly Elections from Changanassery Assembly Constituency as a LDF candidate and lost to UDF candidate former minister C F Thomas. He was the chairman of Kerala State Pollution Control Board.Kerala state pollution control board members He is also one of the joint convenors of Jan Swasthya Abhiyan (Public Health Movement - India).Jan Swasthya Abhiyan (Public Health Movement - India) He is the President of the Democratic Alliance For Knowledge Freedom, Kerala. He was the chairperson of the Expert Committee set up by the Government of Kerala to explore the possibility of setting up a new university of health sciences. The committee submitted its report on the proposed structure and functions of the university in April 2007.Focus on promoting medical research in State Accessed: 2008-10-20. (Archived by WebCite at ) Ekbal is an activist of Kerala Sastra Sahitya Parishad and has held various offices in the organisation. He was the President of Kerala Sastra Sahithya Parishad from 1983–85. He was former editor of the online Science Journal of Kerala Sastra Sahithya Parishad: www.luca.co.in. His book Indian Oushadha Mekhala Innale Innu received the Abu Dhabi Sakthi Award for Scholarly Literature in 2015. thumb|Dr.B.Ekbal presentation Ekbal is a follower of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI(M)) from which he was expelled in 2004 by left-wing hardliners. His membership was later restored. He is married to Dr. A Meharunnisa, the former principal and Professor of Anatomy of Govt. TD Medical College at Alappuzha and Kottayam Medical College. She is currently working as head of department of anatomy in SUT Medical College Trivandrum. ==References== ==Bibliography== * * * ==External links== * Original copy of scan affidavit's, Kerala Assembly Election 2011, National Election Watch * Profile (from 2002) * Google profile * Project report on the establishment of medical university in Kerala (From 2007) * Facebook profile Category:Indian neurosurgeons Category:Living people Category:Academic staff of the University of Kerala Category:Scholars from Thiruvananthapuram Category:Indian health activists Category:20th-century Indian medical doctors Category:Medical doctors from Thiruvananthapuram Category:Communist Party of India (Marxist) politicians from Kerala Category:Politicians from Thiruvananthapuram Category:20th-century Indian politicians Category:21st-century Indian politicians Category:21st-century Indian medical doctors Category:Activists from Kerala Category:1948 births Category:20th-century surgeons Category:Recipients of the Abu Dhabi Sakthi Award