The Hebrew phrase b'rov am hadrat melech (ברב עם הדרת מלך, "in multitudes there is glorification of the king") is a concept in Judaism that the more Jews that are present in a single place, the more God's honor is increased.Borchardt, Reuvain. "Where Everyone Wins". Hamodia Prime, December 11, 2019, p. 21 This concept has applications to the performance of Torah commandments in a public setting, as well as the gathering of Jews to protest Sabbath desecration or other willful violations of Torah law by, for example, the government. ==Sources== The concept is derived from , "In the multitude of people is the king's glory; but in the want of people is the ruin of the prince." According to the Talmud, the word "king" here refers to the King of Kings, God. Thus, large worship gatherings are understood to bring more honor to God.Jacobs, Louis. The Book of Jewish Belief (1984). "Contrary to the now popular view that it is the Jewish ideal to worship in small groups, the Rabbis advise the building of large edifices with numerous congregants. p117 They quoted the verse, "In the multitude of people is the king's glory" (Proverbs 14:28); the more people there are, the greater the honor paid to the King of Kings (tractate Megillah 27b)." -- pages 116-117Gersion Appel The Concise Code of Jewish Law: A guide to prayer and religious observance in the daily life of the Jew. 1989 Page 221 "after an interval of twenty-eight years, when the (vernal) spring equinox of the month of Nisan... It is also best, where possible, to say the blessing in an assembly of people, for it is said, "In the multitude of people is the king's glory" (Proverbs 14:28)." ==Examples== Examples of this principle include: * The Talmud records a disagreement regarding recitation of the blessing on the havdalah candle. According to House of Shammai each person recites the blessing individually (as this involves less delay and leaves more time for Torah study), while according to the House of Hillel one person recites the blessing on behalf of everyone present (due to the principle of b'rov am hadrat melech).B.Berachot 53a * The Talmud attempts to explain why the shofar is blown in the mussaf prayer of Rosh Hashana, rather than the earlier shacharit prayer,Mishna (Rosh Hashanah 4:8) using the principle of b'rov am hadrat melech, as more people are typically found in the synagogue during mussaf. (However, the Talmud then rejects this explanation, as hallel (when recited) is recited in shacharit even though b'rov am hadrat melech would suggest it be recited in mussaf.)B.Rosh Hashanah 32b ==References== Category:Jewish law principles Category:Jewish theology Category:Hebrew words and phrases in the Hebrew Bible Category:Hebrew words and phrases in Jewish law