Bhaurao Dewaji Khobragade (25 September 1925 – 9 April 1984), commonly known as Rajabhau Khobragade, was an Indian barrister, Ambedkarite social activist and politician. He was a member of the Rajya Sabha of the Parliament of India at various times from 1958 to 1984. He was Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha from 1969 to 1972. Khobragade was an Ambedkarite and leader of Republican Party of India (RPI). He hails from Mahar (Scheduled Caste) community and, in 1956 he got converted into Buddhism along with B. R. Ambedkar, the father of the Indian Constitution. Khobragade had his early education at Jubilee High School, Chandrapur. He then went on to clear the Inter Science exam from Nagpur Science College in 1943 and B.A. exam from Morris College, Nagpur in 1945. On the advice of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, he went to London to study law in 1950. He was one of the 16 students Dr. Ambedkar sent to London to study but was an exception as he went to London bearing his own expenses and the rest were scholarship students. The [All Indian Republican Party] (अखिल भारतीय रिपब्लिकन पक्ष)] is a political party in India, a splinter group of the Republican Party of India and named for its leader, B. D. Khobragade. Barrister Rajabhau Khobragade Grandson Rajas Khobragade leading his movement. == Honors == Indian Post issued a stamp dedicated to Khobragade in 2009. ==References== Category:1925 births Category:1984 deaths Category:Marathi politicians Category:Republican Party of India politicians Category:Rajya Sabha members from Maharashtra Category:Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha Category:Republican Party of India (Khobragade) politicians Category:Indian Buddhists Category:20th-century Buddhists Category:Social workers from Maharashtra Category:British Buddhists Category:Converts to Buddhism from Hinduism Category:Buddhist activists Category:Dalit activists Category:Activists from Maharashtra Category:20th-century Indian lawyers Category:20th-century jurists Category:21st-century jurists Category:20th- century Indian politicians Category:Bombay State politicians