Brigham Morris Young (–) was one of the founders of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association (YMMIA), the predecessor to the Young Men program of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). Young was the son of Brigham Young and one of his wives, Margaret Pierce. In 1875, Morris Young served a mission for the LDS Church in the Hawaiian Islands. Shortly after returning from this mission, he was asked by his father to organize the YMMIA along with Junius F. Wells and Milton H. Hardy. In 1883, Young served another mission in the Hawaiian Islands. He married Armeda Snow, a daughter of Lorenzo Snow. Their son, Lorenzo Snow Young, was a prominent architect in Utah. In 1885, Young, his wife, and their children returned from serving his second mission in the Hawaiian Islands. Shortly after returning to Utah, Young began publicly performing as a cross-dressing singer under the pseudonym Madam Pattirini.Galen Snow Young, "Brief History of Brigham Morris Young", 31, Department of Archives and Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, UtahPhotograph of Brigham Morris Young as Madam Pattirini, photo 157, negative 3, Archives, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, UtahDean C. Jessee, "Letters from Brigham Young to His Sons", 243, Deseret Book (1974), Salt Lake City, Utah Young performed as Pattirini in north and central Utah venues from 1885 to the 1900s. He could produce a convincing falsetto, and many in the audience did not realize that Pattirini was Young. One of his performances as Madam Pattirini was for the last birthday celebration of LDS Church president Lorenzo Snow in April 1901.Deseret News, 4 April 1901. He also once portrayed a "fine Irish girl" named Bridget McCarthy at a Christmas ball at the Salt Lake Theatre in 1886.Salt Lake Herald, 1 January 1887. ==See also== *Descendants of Brigham Young ==Sources== *Andrew Jenson. LDS Biographical Encyclopedia. Vol. 4, p. 251\. *Galen Snow Young. Brief History of Brigham Morris Young. P. 31. *Dean C. Jessee. Letters from Brigham Young to His Sons. P. 243. ==References== ==External links== *Brief history of Brigham Morris Young, MSS SC 1999 at L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University Category:1854 births Category:1931 deaths Category:19th-century American singers Category:20th-century American singers Category:19th-century Mormon missionaries Category:American drag queens Category:American leaders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Category:American Mormon missionaries Category:Mormon missionaries in Hawaii Category:Richards–Young family Category:Young Men (organization) people Category:Burials at Salt Lake City Cemetery Category:American expatriates in the Hawaiian Kingdom Category:Cross-dressers Category:Male-to-female cross- dressers Category:Female impersonators Category:Latter Day Saints from Utah Category:Children of Brigham Young Category:Singers from Utah Category:People of the American Old West