thumbnail|B&O; Warehouse, east side thumb|West side, from Oriole Park The B&O; Warehouse is a building in Baltimore, Maryland, adjacent to Oriole Park at Camden Yards. It was constructed by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O;) beginning in 1899, with later sections completed in 1905, adjacent to the B&O;'s Camden Station and Freight Yard, which was located at the corner of Camden St and Eutaw St. Purported to be the longest brick building on the East Coast, the long, eight-story brick structure had 430,000 square feet (almost 40,000 m2) of floor space for merchandise storage and distribution, large enough to hold 1,000 carloads of freight at a time, the B&O; advertised.Herbert H. Harwood, Jr., Impossible Challenge. Baltimore, Md.: Bernard, Roberts and Co., 1979 (), p. 150. The similar B&O; Freight Terminal, in Cincinnati was longer at long, but was only 5 stories. Railroad historian Herbert H. Harwood proclaimed it an "awesome structure ... a truly classic turn-of-the-century railroad warehouse."Harwood, p. 416. The warehouse was used by the B&O; through the 1960s but was mostly vacant by the 1970s due to the use of trucks and newer, more efficient single-floor warehouses located in industrial parks elsewhere.Stephen J. Salamon, David P. Oroszi, and David P. Ori, Baltimore and Ohio - Reflections of the Capitol Dome. Silver Spring, Md.: Old Line Graphics, 1993 (), pp. 26–29. The former B&O; Warehouse was incorporated into Oriole Park at Camden Yards when it opened in 1992 and looms over the stadium's right field wall. The warehouse was converted to team offices, team spaces, and a private club for the Orioles. It is also used for private wedding receptions. In the entire history of Oriole Park at Camden Yards, no player has ever hit the warehouse in a game. Ken Griffey Jr. is the only player to hit the B&O; Warehouse in fair territory, though it was with a non-regulation baseball in an exhibition. He did so in the 1993 MLB Home Run Derby, in which he tied Juan González before losing in a playoff. ==External links== * * B&O; Warehouse on Google Street View * Baltimore & Ohio Warehouse at Camden Yards ==References== Category:Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Category:Baltimore Orioles Category:Buildings and structures in Baltimore Category:Downtown Baltimore Category:Historic warehouses in the United States Category:Commercial buildings completed in 1905 Category:1905 establishments in Maryland