B-P's footprint is a casting, usually in bronze or brass, of the right foot of Lord Baden-Powell, the founder of the Scout and Guide Movements, who is known as "B-P." The idea is that people may put their foot into this casting, so that they can say that they have "walked in the footsteps of B-P."Miss Kari Aas, who also designed the WAGGGS emblem that was adopted at the World Conference in 1930, attended the 1928 World Scout Conference as one of the Norwegian delegates, and much of the information herein was gleaned from her report. ==History== The 1928 Scouting World Conference was officially opened on May 4 in Parád. The next day, the delegates went on an excursion to Lake Balaton and other places returning to Budapest in the afternoon. That evening, Baden-Powell, his wife Olave and Lord Hampton arrived. On May 6, there was a rally at the playing field of Ferencvárosi TC attended by 9,647 out of the 25,000 Scouts then in Hungary and up to 20,000 of the public. On May 7 B-P came to the Hárshegy Training Park. B-P wrote, about the rally at Hárshegy: From this cast two bronze copies were made, one was for the Hárshegy Training Park and the other was a gift to Baden-Powell, which he passed to the British Scout Headquarters. During the 4th World Scout Jamboree in Gödöllő, Hungary the British Contingent get a copy from the Hungarian Honorary Chief Scout, count Pál Teleki. One of them passed to the B-P House, London, and the other passed to the Gilwell Park. When the communists took over and banned Scouting in 1948, the training ground was confiscated and houses were built on the land; neither the original concrete footprint, nor the "Hungarian original bronze" has been seen since. The text is the next on the bronze statue: at right side: 'The Footprint in the Sands of Time', at the left side: 'To Gilwell Park the home of Scoutcraft from Hárshegy Training Park /Hungary/ in memory of the visit of the Chief Scout'. ==Norway== The Norwegian Boy Scout Organization received a copy of the B-P Footprint as a gift from Gilwell Park by Camp Chief John ThurmanVisitors' book, Sverveli in the summer of 1959. A Kudu horn was presented at the same time. The footprint then was mounted in front of the house at the Norwegian Gilwell Training Ground on the farm "Sverveli" in Telemark, Norway.. There it stayed for 41 years, until June 2010, when Sverveli was sold. The Norwegian B-P Footprint then was removed and is at present a part of the equipment used at the annual Norwegian Trefoil- Gilwell (Wood Badge) training courses.. In June 2012, a casting in brass was made from the Norwegian footprint at the Østlandske Lettmetall foundry in Elverum, Norway. It is used during the Trefoil-Gilwell courses as a symbol of the Baden-Powell spirit, along with a 6-bead woodbadge suspended from a tripod.. ==United Kingdom== ===Gilwell Park=== Before World War II a copy of the "British original bronze" was cast and placed at Gilwell Park, the original remained at Scout Headquarters in London. Gilwell was requisitioned by the War Ministry from 1940 to 1945 as a local command, training, and ordnance centre. During this time the footprint was left undisturbed. In 1991 four Members of the Hungarian Scout Headquarters team visited England, and saw the Baden-Powell footprint at Gilwell. At their request, a plastic mould was taken of the first "British original bronze", by this time at Baden-Powell House, and from this the Hungarians cast a new footprint, which was installed in their new Scout Training Park, given them in 1991 by the Hungarian Government. ===Brownsea Island=== On Friday August 3, 2012, there was a dinner to close the 67th Norwegian Trefoil-Gilwell Training course held on the island. A copy of the B-P footprint was presented by staff member Øystein Gonsholt to Brownsea Island, represented by the warden for that weekend, Claire, as a symbol of the deep-felt gratitude felt by the course attenders and staff, but also on behalf of former, present and future Scouts and Guides of Norway as a tribute to B-P, his Scouting idea and Brownsea Island - the cradle of Scouting. In 1963 the National Trust (the owner of Brownsea Island) opened the Island to the public, in a ceremony conducted by Olave Lady Baden- Powell, the World Chief Guide. On May 13, 2013, as part of the celebrations to mark the 50th anniversary of the opening, the Brownsea Island footprint was installed beside an existing bust of Lord Baden-Powell and unveiled by one of B-P's grandchildren, Gillian Clay, daughter of the B-P's daughter Betty Clay. It is the donors' highest wish that their gift will benefit Brownsea Island and give joy and good B-P spirit to visitors to Brownsea Island for many years to come.Øystein Gonsholt, staff member 65. Trefoil-Gilwell training ==List of copies== Footprint of Baden Powell: Tribute in the Paso Coyol Ecological Park of Córdoba, Veracruz, Mexico|thumb Apart from those mentioned above, a number of copies exist around the world, among them: Country City Location Provenance Notes Australia Victoria Point Eprapah Copy of a 1931 print made by B-P from his visit to Eprapah. Australian original is now at the Baden Powell Scout Park. El Salvador San Salvador Scout Association of El Salvador headquarters Gift of William D. Campbell, Provenance unknown Hungary Budapest Sztrilich Pál Scout Centre Copy of the Scout Association copy Hungary Budapest Hárshegy Training Park The original - lost in 1948 - copy of the Scout Association copy Kenya Nairobi Rowallan Scout Centre Unknown Mexico Córdoba Paso Coyol Ecological Park Unknown Mexico Tepoztlán, Morelos Meztitla Scout Camp School Gift of John Thurman, Copy of the Scout Association footprint Norway Telemark Sverveli Gift of John Thurman, Copy of the Scout Association footprint In storage United Kingdom Poole Harbour, Dorset county Brownsea Island Copy of the Norwegian footprint United Kingdom Chingford, London Gilwell Park Copy of the Scout Association footprint United Kingdom London Scout Association Only copy of the Hungarian original United States Elbert, Colorado Camp Cris Dobbins Provenance unknown United States Ward, Colorado Tahosa High Adventure Base Provenance unknown United States Miami Lakes, Florida Thomas L. Tatham Scout Service Center Copy of the Meztitla footprint Zimbabwe Gordon Park, Matopos Zimbabwe Scout Centenary Camp Provenance unknown ==See also== * Petrosomatoglyph ==External links== * * ==References== Category:Casting (manufacturing) Category:Scouting monuments and memorials Category:Foot