B Studios is an Indian film production and distribution company headed by Bala. In the recent past, B Studios has financed several of Bala's directorial ventures, and other films by filmmakers including Mysskin and Sarkunam. == History == In September 2004, director Bala revealed that he had launched his own production house, B Studios, to "give opportunity for new talent". He announced his intentions of producing two films a year and also venturing into ad films. Subsequently, the first venture was Maayavi (2005) directed by Singampuli, a comedy film starring Suriya and Jyothika in the lead roles. As a result of their association in Naan Kadavul in late 2005, B Studios agreed to produce Ajith Kumar's Paramasivan (2006), but later opted out. B Studios were also briefly involved with the production of Vishnuvardhan's Sarvam (2009) during June 2006, when the film was announced with Suriya and Ileana D'Cruz in the lead roles. Initially planned as a co-production with Studio Green, the film failed to progress and was released with different makers and a different cast in 2009. Following the release of Naan Kadavul in early 2009, Bala announced that he would finance another film with Suriya for director Singampuli and a film with Jayam Ravi for Aacharya Ravi, but neither materialised. Bala has since financed his own projects, as well as individual films from Mysskin and Sarkunam. == Filmography == Title Year Director Cast Synopsis Maayavi 2005 Singampuli Suriya, Jyothika, Sathyan A famous actress, after being kidnapped by a fan of hers, starts liking him. Paradesi 2013 Bala Atharvaa, Vedhika, Sai Dhanshika A rural man is lured by the promise of money signs up to work on a faraway tea plantation for colonisers. Pisaasu 2014 Mysskin Naga, Prayaga Martin, Radha Ravi A man experiences paranormal activities at his house after the death of a girl who he tried to save. Chandi Veeran 2015 Sarkunam Atharvaa, Anandhi, Lal A young man returning from abroad tries to stop a village feud on water sharing. Tharai Thappattai 2016 Bala Sasikumar, Varalaxmi Sarathkumar, R. K. Suresh The leader of a struggling dance troupe is torn over whether he should fall in love with its principal dancer. Naachiyaar 2018 Bala Jyothika, G. V. Prakash Kumar, Ivana The police work to uncover the truth after a young man is accused of assaulting his girlfriend. ==References== Category:Film distributors of India Category:Film production companies based in Chennai Category:Indian film studios Category:2004 establishments in Tamil Nadu Category:Indian companies established in 2004 Category:Mass media companies established in 2004