Air Marshal B Chandra Sekhar, AVSM is an officer in the Indian Air Force. He is currently serving as the commandant of the Air Force Academy. He assumed the office on 8 March 2022 succeeding Air Marshal Sreekumar Prabhakaran. Previously, he served as the Senior Air Staff Officer - Training Command. ==Early life and education== B Chandra Sekhar is a native of Telangana. He is an alumnus of Defence Services Staff College, Wellington, National Defence Academy, Khadagwasla, Flying Instructors School, College of Defence Management and National Defence College, New Delhi. ==Career== B Chandra Sekhar was commissioned in the flying branch of the Indian Air Force on 21 December 1984. He has over 5400 hours of incident free flying on various aircraft. B Chandra Sekhar is a qualified flying instructor and has the accolade of the landing a medium-lift helicopter in Siachen Glacier. With a long career of 38 years. He has served as appointments such as Ops IIB in the Eastern Sector, Principal Director (Administration) in Strategic Forces Command. He was instrumental in induction of Chinook helicopters and Rafale jet in the Eastern Air Command of the Indian Air Force. As an Air Vice Marshal, he served as the Senior Officer- in-charge Administration for both Southern Air Command and Eastern Air Command. He served as the Senior Air Staff Officer - Training Command till 7 March 2022. == Honours and decorations == During his career, B Chandra Sekhar has been awarded the Ati Vishisht Seva Medal in 2020. Ati Vishisht Seva Medal == Personal life == B Chandra Shekhar is married to Mrs B Komala, who is an experienced banker. They are blessed with a daughter and a son who are both commissioned officers in the Indian Air Force. == References == Category:Indian Air Force air marshals Category:Recipients of the Ati Vishisht Seva Medal Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Living people Category:Commandants of the Indian Air Force Academy Category:College of Defence Management alumni Category:National Defence Academy (India) alumni Category:National Defence College, India alumni Category:Defence Services Staff College alumni