thumb|100px|Yehoshua Barzillai thumb|100px|Ahad Ha'am B'nei Moshe (, "Children of Moses", variously transliterated as Bnai Moshe, Benei Moshe, Bene Mosheh, etc.) was a Zionist organization. It was established as a secret organization in Odessa in 1889 on the day Seventh of Adar, which is considered the day of death and birth of Moses. While its originator was (Eisenstadt), Ahad Ha'am was persuaded to take leadership of the organization. Its ideology was described as "cultural Zionism", as opposed to the political Zionism.Asael Abelman, "The Failure of Cultural Zionism", Mosaic Magazine, Otober 26 2016Benei Moshe, Jewish Virtual Library In 1893 its headquarters were moved to Jaffa and it ceased to be secretive. It was suggested for it to become a political party, however internal controversies and frustration had led to its disestablishment in 1897. Its membership was about 160 persons. Its major practical achievements include improvements in Hebrew education, it particular, establishing modernized heders (heder metukkan); help in establishing of the Rehovot settlement, and in establishing a Hebrew publishing house Ahi'asaf in Warsaw, the first one of the kind. It published the annual () almanac (1893-1904) by a large group of writers and intellectuals, members of B'nei Moshe, from many different fields.Ahiasafשנה טובה למהלך החדש, Ha'aretz, September 28, 2011 ==Notable members== *Ahad Ha'am *, lawyer, educator, Zionist activist, literary editor, He headed B'nei Moshe in Kremenchug after he was appointed "crown rabbi" there *, hazzan, choirmeister, composer, musicologist, writer. Member of B'nei Moshe since 1899. His music was popular in B'nei Moshe.AVRAHAM MOSHE BERNSTEIN * (Abraham Leib Shelkovich), writer, secretary of B'nei Moshe in Warsaw, pioneer of modern Hebrew publishing in Eastern Europe. In particular, he took part in founding of Ahi'asaf *, agronomist, land purchaser on behalf of the Jewish Colonization Association, secretary of B'nei Moshe in Jaffa *Menachem Ussishkin *Yehoshua Barzillai *Yehuda Gur linguist, educator, writer, and translator. Together with Barzillai he edited the B'nei Moshe monthly Mikhtavim me-Erez Yisrael ("Letters from Erez Israel", 1893–94). ==References== Category:Zionist organizations Category:Zionism in Russia Category:Zionism in Ottoman Palestine Category:History of Odesa