Brian Joseph Callaghan II (born July 1, 1981) is an American professional soccer coach who is currently serving as the interim head coach of the United States men's national team. ==Playing career== Callaghan played collegiate soccer at Ursinus College, making 250 career saves, fourth in school history at the end of his final season. ==Coaching career== After graduation, Callaghan coached at his alma mater and at the club level before joining the staff at Saint Joseph's and later Villanova, where his grandfather, Jack Kraft, had served as the men's basketball head coach in the 1960s and 1970s and led the Wildcats to the 1971 national championship game. From 2005 to 2010, Callaghan served as an assistant coach with the Wildcats before being promoted to associate head coach in 2010. While at Villanova, Callaghan met Jim Curtin, a Wildcats standout from 1997 to 2000 who was serving as a volunteer assistant. Following Curtin's eventual hiring by the Philadelphia Union as a member of the club's academy staff, Callaghan came on board in 2012 while continuing to serve at Villanova. He left Villanova to became a full- time member of the Union in 2013 following Curtin's promotion to the first team as an assistant coach, and later was one of Curtin's initial hires following the latter's appointment to interim head coach and later to permanent head coach after the firing of John Hackworth. Callaghan remained with the Union through 2018, before joining the U.S. men's national team as an assistant coach and strategy analyst under Gregg Berhalter in January 2019. After Berhalter's contract expired at the end of 2022, Callaghan stayed with the program following Anthony Hudson's promotion from assistant coach to interim head coach. On May 30, 2023, U.S. Soccer announced that Callaghan would succeed Anthony Hudson as interim head coach of the men's national team. In June 2023, U.S. Soccer re-appointed Gregg Berhalter as head coach and announced that Callaghan's stint as interim head coach will conclude after the 2023 CONCACAF Gold Cup. He made his debut as head coach on June 15 against rivals Mexico in the semi-finals of the 2023 CONCACAF Nations League Finals. The United States won 3–0 and Callaghan became the first U.S. coach to win on their debut against Mexico since David Gould in 1934 FIFA World Cup qualification. The team went on to defeat Canada in the tournament final three days later. ==Coaching statistics== Coaching record by team and tenure Team From To Record United States (interim) May 30, 2023 present ==Honours== United States *CONCACAF Nations League: 2022–23 ==Personal life== Raised in Ventnor City, New Jersey, Callaghan played prep soccer at Holy Spirit High School.Tannewald, Jonathan. "Ex-Union assistant B.J. Callaghan to serve as interim USMNT coach this summer", The Philadelphia Inquirer, May 30, 2023. Accessed May 30, 2023. "Top assistant B.J. Callaghan, a Ventnor native with many years of experience with the national team and the Union, will lead the program through this summer’s Concacaf Nations League and Gold Cup tournaments.... The 41-year-old ex-goalkeeper played high school soccer at Holy Spirit, college ball at Ursinus, and worked on the coaching staffs at Ursinus, St. Joseph’s, and Villanova." Callaghan graduated from Ursinus College in 2003 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics and business administration.https://www.linkedin.com/in/bj-callaghan-134b29b/ ==References== ==External links== * Saint Joseph's coaching profile * Villanova women's coaching profile * Villanova men's coaching profile * Philadelphia Union coaching profile Category:1981 births Category:Living people Category:American soccer players Category:American soccer coaches Category:Holy Spirit High School (New Jersey) alumni Category:People from Ventnor City, New Jersey Category:Sportspeople from Atlantic County, New Jersey Category:Ursinus Bears Category:Men's association football goalkeepers Category:College men's soccer players in the United States Category:Villanova Wildcats men's soccer coaches Category:Philadelphia Union non-playing staff Category:Ursinus College alumni Category:American women's soccer coaches Category:Soccer players from New Jersey Category:2023 CONCACAF Gold Cup managers