B-K Root Beer is an independent chain of drive-in fast-food restaurants, distinguished by their draft root beer and root beer floats. A midwestern chain, B-K restaurants are located in Indiana, Michigan, and Ohio. B-K stands for "Bergerson & Kenefick".RootBeerWorld.com - Yellow Froth Pages The first one was built in Wabash, Indiana, in 1940. At one time, there were 238 B-K drive-ins around Indiana and surrounding states. It was founded by Melvin and Mary Bergerson in the mid-1940s in Michigan City, Indiana."The Great American Hot Dog Book" by Becky Mercuri ==History== The first B-K chain was founded in the mid-1940s in Wabash, Indiana. All of the current B-K Rootbeer restaurants are independently owned and operated. The B-K Root Beer chain of drive-in restaurants became owned by DeNovo Corporation in Livonia, Michigan, of which David Chapoton was President. In the late 1980s, Dave sold the B-K trademarks to Burger King Corporation, which they then launched their new Grilled Chicken sandwich, the BK Broiler. In 2016, the B-K trademarks were abandoned by Burger king, and David Hosticka of Michigan retained the trademark & patent attorney Jake W. Lombardo of Bolhouse, Baar & Hofstee, P.C. and attempted to re- register the B-K Root Beer trademarks for the purpose of supporting the 35 or so remaining drive-in locations, and possibly reviving the B-K Root Beer brand. The application was rejected by the US Patent and Trademark office, citing that the letters B-K are still currently registered by Burger King Corporation. ==See also== * List of hamburger restaurants == References == Category:Restaurants in Indiana Category:Restaurants in Iowa Category:Restaurants in Ohio Category:Economy of the Midwestern United States Category:Regional restaurant chains in the United States Category:Fast-food chains of the United States Category:Fast-food hamburger restaurants Category:Fast-food franchises Category:Drive-in restaurants Category:Root beer stands Category:Hot dog restaurants in the United States Category:Root beer Category:1940s establishments in Indiana